Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by a fellow YouTuber, Robert Pantano.
He's the writer and creator behind the YouTube channel
and production house Pursuit of Wonder. He's also the
author of several books, and today we're going to
talk about his latest one. The terrible paradox of
self-awareness, how awareness is the beginning and end of
suffering. So Robert, welcome to the show. It's a
big pleasure to everyone. And as I said off
record, I've been following your channel for several years
now. I'm a big fan. So thank you so
much for doing this.
Of course, and thank you so much for having
me. I really appreciate it.
OK, so I mean, your book is about self-awareness.
I would like to ask you first, what is
self-awareness and how do you come at such a
question? I mean, do you apply more of a
philosophical approach? To it, more of a psychological approach,
both. How do you approach it?
I suppose there would be a little bit of
a Venn diagram overlap between the two philos philosophical
and psychological approach, but I, I'm definitely skewing towards
the philosophical end of the spectrum. I'm really, if
I try to boil it down as simply as
I can, uh, in philosophical terms, I'm really referring
to the conceptual awareness of a self. So it's
not merely, um, an animal seeing its reflection and,
and You know, potentially grasping the idea that it
is its body. It's all of the actual additional
conceptual and, um, you know, the conceptual terminology we
attach to selfhood, uh, that we are not only
aware of a body and a mind, but we
start to attach concepts to the body and mind
that we exist within, and that awareness starts to
tighten and tighten and tighten deeper and deeper into,
um, oftentimes sort of illusory conditions, but nonetheless, um,
it, what it outputs in my mind is a
sort of philosophical kind of self-awareness.
Are you interested in sort of the evolutionary origins
of self-awareness? I mean, the reasons why we have
it from an evolutionary perspective. Why is it that
we evolved such a psychological trait, or is that
something that doesn't interest you? Much you're just interested
in, OK, so we have this psychological feature. It
has certain kinds of consequences for our psychology more
broadly, particularly the existential side of things, and I
want to see what we can do with it.
Yeah, so, I start from the position of my,
my biggest interest is in what are the implications
of that degree of self-awareness, that complexity of self-awareness
and the attachment that we have to ourselves and
our idea of ourselves, and the idea of our
preferences. That's the most interesting to me. Um. But
you inevitably once you start digging into that, you
go a little bit beneath the surface and a
little further, and you find your, your way to
sort of the evolutionary origins of our degree of
awareness and consciousness. So, they're all interconnected. You can't
be interested in the top of the. Without being
interested in the bottom, inevitably you find your way
to both, whether you start at the bottom or
the top. But I really start, my biggest interest
has been in the implications, and in order to
better understand the implications, you have to start to
figure out what the evolutionary origins are. And unfortunately,
Figuring exploring the evolutionary origins, uh, even though they're
intertwined, don't necessarily lend themselves to alleviations of the
implications. Sometimes they just, uh, And, you know, entwine
you further into some sort of fatalistic understanding of
the entire process, and, and that's part of what
I try to grapple with is if we are
inevitably born into a system that produces a kind
of consciousness and self-awareness that may or may not
be, um, designed with our qualitative experience in mind
as individuals. What do we do when we are
born into this world and have to figure out
how to exist through our lifetime in a brain
and body that was evolved for a system whose
whose main objectives may not always be our own
in terms of our experience.
So earlier you've already talked a little bit about
the self and of course self is included in
self awareness. How seriously do you take our understanding
of the self? I mean, do you have sort
of a more Buddhist approach to it where Basically
self is pretty much an illusion, or do you
think it's a little bit more, or do you
think it's a little bit more concrete, let's say
than that? Yeah,
I, I would skew towards the Buddhist side of,
of that binary where Um, I don't live as
if I don't have a concrete self. I don't,
I don't feel in every moment as if I'm
not a self, but I, I also know, particularly
in moments of reflection, or when I'm engaging in
these ideas more thoroughly, whether it's through my work
or conversations like this, um, I do arrive at
the high likelihood that the self is, is definitely
A, an extremely malleable, if not entirely illusory concept
that is basically strung together through a process of,
um, you know, our ego and our, and our
conscious orientation for, you know, as a matter of
function, not a matter of truth. And, um, yeah,
I would say that the self is really more
of a process. As long as we are existing
and as long as we have. We have awareness
of our existence. We are continually interacting with the
external world and the internal sort of mechanisms of
our bio biology and psychologies. All of those things
are unfolding in different ways. They're interacting in different
ways, giving every moment of time in every position
in space, and that is always creating a different
orientation and a different sense of that orientation. And
so, we string them all together and form a
sense of self, but there's no moment where you
could say this, now, here is me. It's never
conclusive, and in my mind, the only moment where
you can be conclusively an authentic final self is
after you are no longer in existence, if that
is a moment that is, is the case, where
once we part ways with life, if there is
nothing beyond life and after death, then only the
sum of our total experiences and total interactions with
our experiences internally. Um, COULD you actually have like
a conclusive self? At which point there is no
self to be experienced. So, it's sort of a
paradox in terms of there actually ever being a
conclusive, uh, final full self.
Yeah, I don't know if you agree with what
I'm about to say, but I mean, in recent
years I've been getting more and more into dynamical
systems theory applied to psychology, and I'm, uh, I
mean, I'm inching more and more toward having a
sort of process ontology approach instead of a substance
ontology approach to. PSYCHOLOGY and I would include the
self in that and so I'm more and more
convinced that it's sort of a dynamic system that
is always interacting with internal and external influences and
transforming over time. And I also think, and this
is the point where I would like to I,
I would like to get your comment on, uh,
because I, I think that it's also pretty much
contingent and it's contingent in the sense that also
has existential implications. So I'm going to explain what
I mean here. It's contingent in the sense that,
OK, so I have this sort of identity, Ricardo
Lopes, but it's contingent in the sense that I,
I was born in Portugal. I live in a.
Particular culture, this identity was attributed to me and
perhaps I live also in circumstances or because of
my experiences in life. Uh, I, for example, right
now I'm a podcaster, so I have this podcaster
identity also associated with myself, but that is all
very much contingent. If I was born in a
traditional hunter-gatherer society, podcaster wouldn't even. BE an identity
that would be available there. I mean that wouldn't
make any sense at all, but I mean, I'm
talking, I'm saying all of this because it seems
to me that the way we conceptualize ourselves is
very much socio-culturally contingent and then the kinds of
things that we attach to it are the ones
that can have a very powerful impact in how
we deal with. Life existentially because let's say that
for example, I start identifying as a podcaster and
then one day for some reason this doesn't work
anymore and that has a huge impact on me
because that sort of extirpates that part of my
identity and I sort of sense that I lost
something when I lost it. I mean, does that,
does that make sense?
Perfect sense.
Yeah, and, and I, I, I mean, I mean,
but would you have anything to that, or do
you think that all of what I said, I
mean, I, I largely agree and I largely think
it makes sense. I think the implications of that
are, are significant though, because the, the idea that,
I mean, we often feel as though we We
have this freedom around who we become, who we
are, what we like, what we choose to do.
But when you, you know, based on what you
just laid out, it's entirely contingent. If we just,
if we don't even narrow it in all the
way to where I could or or might in
a moment narrow it in. Just the implications of
the particular generation you are born into and a
part of, all of the options. That are available
to you, given the cultural and economic and technological
conditions of that generation in that particular place. Uh,
THEY lay out the sort of, um, it's, it's
not an, it's not an essay prompt on a
test. It's a filler, it's, it's a a bubble
choice, you know, there's a selection that you can
choose from that you fill in one. You don't,
you know, manufacture or manifest options out of your,
your own being. You have a multiple choice question
in front of you that you can pick from
a select options, and that's just in time. Then
you add space, you add the particular country, and
uh economy and culture that overlays on top of
that, that also deeply influences you. And then you
can add all sorts of additional things like what
your family is like, what your brain is like,
your skin color, your height, your gender, your sex,
your everything. You could start adding all these overlays.
All of a sudden the multiple choice questions start
to Not inherently or necessarily reduced, but they, they
definitely seem to reduce in a way that matters.
You know, you could be You could be small
or tall and still see if basketball is for
you, but largely the odds of being a basketball
player, if you're 5'5, dramatically decrease. So that's an
obvious example, but the point is, it's not like
you can't be a basketball player if you're short,
but your odds of being one are are extraordinarily
low. And so, the point is, as all of
those Those overlays of circumstances and contingencies start to
encroach on your being, and as you grow up
into your contingencies, your, your options for what you
might be and what you could be, uh, dramatically
reduced. And so, your, your sense of freedom in
your selection and your sense of freedom in becoming
who you become and who you will become, are,
are in that sense. Extraordinarily constrained, and so the
illusion of selfhood becomes even more illusory in my
mind because you really were narrowed into a funnel
of your being and your orientation and sense of
self, as opposed to having selected it from the
sort of ether of possible selfhoods. You are really
basically handed a very small deck of cards and
you picked one, and then the magician said, see,
I knew you were gonna be a 2 of
spades. It's the trick. The the trick was in
the deck the whole time. It was a part
of the process.
But do you think that knowing about this can
be mostly freeing, or it can be like infuriating
or frustrating, because for example, I come at things
more from a scientific perspective because my background is
in science and for example, I've been learning about
a lot about anthropology and uh I mean by
learning more and more anthropology. Uh, I, it's easier
for me to free myself from things that are
normative in my society, in my context, the context
where I was brought up in, but at the
same time it's very frustrating because I mean, I
still have to inhabit this society and it's very,
very hard for people to not treat. Uh, NORMS
and conventions from that are just accidents they were
born into in their own society as, uh, I
mean, ultimate truths and questionable truths, and I am
trying to live life in a society which treats
contingencies, accidents, and so on as unquestionable truths can
be very frustrating, right?
Yeah. I mean, uh, it, it depends on who
you are. I always try to caveat my answers
when it comes to these kinds of questions. It,
it, it really does depend on who you are,
because I know plenty of people for whom these
kinds of questions, and the dissection and inspection of
the contingencies of their existence is extraordinarily frustrating, and
something that is so frustrating that the mere prospect
of it, uh, and the engagement of the ideas
is enough to, to basically anger them so that
they don't want to continue. Any further, and I
don't blame them. I, I totally understand that. For
me personally, however, it's sort of where I find
my meaning and my wonder in, in life. And,
and I obviously have, uh, you know, made a
career out of it, and it's been how I've
always, I've found myself asking these sorts of questions
and trying to inspect the sort of normative qualities
of the world that I was born into, and
the environment that I lived in as a child
and an adolescent, and so on. So, I always
was finding myself asking the questions and just dissecting
the norms, and um every time I open it
up, some people might find something that's grotesque. For
me, I find something that's deeply interesting and riveting,
and that makes the entire process of being an
existing worthwhile. I like to see what's inside things.
I like to sort of Shake the system, if
you will, which itself is something that I inherited
and was contingent on a number of other factors
that narrowed me into my being, and I recognize
that. So, for, for the people for whom that
is, Interesting and engaging, they're no less um susceptible
to the entire process. I am myself a a
product of a sequence of environmental and psychological and
biological conditions in my mind that basically narrowed me
into being that kind of person. But nonetheless, I'm
here I am, and if you are that kind
of person, I always suggest that you, you don't.
Uh, FEAR, fear it. You don't, uh, sway away
from it. You, you really engage in it fully.
Because once you already start asking the questions, and
start questioning the norms, and engaging in, you know,
what's the contingency of my existence, there's something worse,
I find, by repressing it, and denying it, and
pretending like everything's fine. It's actually far more, uh,
rewarding and riveting, and perhaps functional to pursue those
threads of thought. To their ends, and just let
them pull you until the bitter end, because there's
something, like I said, that's invoking of wonder and
intrigue, that if you're the kind of person who's
already doing that, you kind of need to find
your wonder and intrigue somewhere. And so, dissection of
of everything might be part of your process that's
unique to you. Um, BUT if you're not that
kind of person, it's just, yeah, it's totally understandable
that it might just be frustrating. And you might
just find it pointless, useless. Why, why do I
need to know the contingencies of, of, you know,
who I am and my existence? Why do I
need to dissect underneath the surface of, you know,
the surface of, of, of being itself? It's, and,
and I would, if you're that kind of person
who doesn't understand or doesn't care to understand why
you'd be appeal, you know, why that would be
appealing, Then don't do it. I, I mean, that's
totally fair. So, there's definitely, uh, you know, a,
a sufficiently divorced Venn diagrams of kind of kinds
of people who find it either frustrating, wondrous, or
somewhere in between. And it just sort of depends
on your ability to, you know, recognize who you
are within that Venn diagram and, and pursue your,
your questions and interests accordingly.
How do you approach individuation and perhaps what Schopenhauer
called the principi individuation is, I mean, basically our
process of individuation because, uh, I mean at the
same time that perhaps you can, um, I mean,
be creative in the sense that you individuate yourself,
it can also be a very, a very violent
process of, I mean, basically, uh, separating yourself from
the rest of existence and I mean, as far
as Schopenhauer was concerned, at least if I understood
him correctly. Um, THIS individuation process is also the
source or the ultimate source of all, uh, suffering
for humans and perhaps other sentient life.
Yeah, so, if I understand your question correctly, it's
something something along the lines of You know, when
we become more proximal to our individual selves, the
level of suffering increases. Is, is that a fair
summary, or did I misunderstand?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, some of that, and also, I
mean, just the broader process of, uh, I mean
us as uh biological organisms as organisms with sentience,
with consciousness, uh, I mean, uh, sort of, um.
Uh, uh, THINKING of ourselves and approaching things as
individuals separated from the rest of existence, at least
if I understood him correctly, for Schopenhauer was, um,
the ultimate source of or the adulttimate origin of,
uh, suffering.
Yeah, well, for starters, I, I largely agree with
Schopenhauer's conclusion there. Not all of his conclusions everywhere,
but that conclusion there and several of his other
sort of adjacent conclusions, um, and the reason for
that is. First of all, we are not separate
from everything in my mind. We, we, everything that
we are and depend on, everything we're made of
and subsist upon is not a, a choice. It's
not, uh, we could take or leave it. It's
entirely Integral. It's, it's a, a webbing that without
one component, the rest separates. And so, we are
not separate from everything. We feel as though we
are separate from everything. We feel as though we
are individuals experiencing the plurality of reality separate from
us as a product of our self-awareness. And that's
where I would agree with Schopenhauer and people like
him, you know, thinkers like him who, uh, basically
conclude that that is. That that creates the tension
between us and everything of which we are a
part of, where in which we try to control
the, the world that we are a part of,
the reality that we are part of. We try
to understand, we try to grasp, we try to
conceptualize, we try to overlay language and concepts and
everything else, and all of that. It comes from
the perspective of an individuated perspective and process in
which we think we can be separate and map
that separateness onto everything else. And, uh, that's a,
in my mind, futile would perhaps be a, a,
a like a kind way of putting it, but
more than that, it's, it's, it's. Uh, CREATES the,
the tension through which we, you know, turn the
pain of existence into suffering. The constant desire to
make sense from our perspective of the rest of
the plurality of reality is an impossibility that we
depend so much of our quality of experience in
life on that, uh, it. Exacerbates that the the
inherent pains of, of, of life already that exist
as just any biological individual being, and then to
try to map conceptual terms from an individual perspective
onto a plurality of reality in which you are
not separate from, but yet you feel separate from
by virtue of your self-awareness absolutely does in my
mind, um, exacerbate, if not entirely create the sort
of origins of suffering, but it's a very natural
process because that's why. I find that, um, you
know, our self-awareness to be not only a paradox,
but a terrible paradox because it, it really, it,
it makes us try to understand. And control and
separate from that which we cannot control, understand, or
be separate from. And so that's an inherently futile
and suffering induced process. However, on the flip side
of it, there does seem to be this interesting,
as far as I can tell, human phenomenon where
In that process, even in the futility and the
suffering of that process, we can, can make art,
and we can find wonder, and we can create
love, and we can create all these really incredibly
interesting conceptual systems, and To me, it's, it's unclear
whether it's, you know, one's worth the other, but
it's, we, here we are, and I do find
it to be paradoxical in the sense that it
can be so horrific and so terrible that we
strive to do what is basically we're, you know,
putting our pedal to the metal into a brick
wall. In a sense, but yet we along the
way, we're laughing and listening to great music and
talking about interesting things.
Do you think if that was possible? Actually, let
me ask you this before I ask the following
question. Have you ever watched Neon Genesis Evangelion?
No.
Ah, that's a shame because they have the perfect
plot where they explore this kind of question, but
I mean, just very, very, very briefly and with,
with avoiding spoilers as much as possible. I mean,
basically they have what they call the human instrumentality,
instrumentality. The project and there are certain characters whose
goal is to basically reverse individuation and annihilate individuation
and basically for people to just come together into
one unified consciousness and there would no longer be
any individual. Individuals, everyone would share everyone's thoughts with
everyone else, and no one would be able to
distinguish themselves from the others. I mean, do you
think that if something like that would be possible
for us to merge collectively our individual consciousnesses and
eliminate individuation, that, that, that could be better than
the existence we're living.
It's a really interesting question because it sort of
presupposes the, you know, we have to work toward
the answer based on our current frame of reference,
our current perspective, and our current experience. And that
makes it a very difficult question because part of
me wants to say, yeah, that would be a
much more Congenial, pleasant experience for beings. In the,
in the particular universe that we inhabit. And, but
the other part of me would say, based on
my experience, that would, you know, divorce me from
everything that I have derived meaning and wonder, and
intrigue and love from. So, it's, it's I'm sort
of split fifty-fifty on whether or not the uh
circumstances of awareness and self-awareness that we've found ourselves
inhabiting are a curse or a gift. It's really
right down the middle for me, and that's what
makes it so interesting. But I would say that
if you were to find yourself being born into
the condition that you just described, uh, I think
you'd be better off.
Yeah, and look, if you haven't watched it, then
I really recommend it, and I bet that after
you see it, after you watch it, you will
probably want to make a video about it because
it's a really fascinating anime.
So, and so it was something Genesis, what was
the name of it
again? Neon Genesis Evangelion. Got it.
I'll definitely watch it.
Yeah, yeah, because I mean there's always this contention,
and that's very well explored in that anime as
well, uh, by the way, because I mean, as
individuals and as human individuals particularly, and I guess
there's also to a lesser extent this kind of
tension. In other species, but there's also this thing
of there's also kind of a barrier. Some of
it, I guess, is linguistic, some of it is
because of our own individual psychological personality traits and
so on, but there's always these. Frustration when it
comes to communicating with other people because it seems
that there's always room for misunderstanding and there's always
something that perhaps the way we use language or
even I mean It's, there's limitations that are just
intrinsic to language. I mean, there's nothing we can
do about that, but there, there's always limits to
communication, and it's very easy for people to feel
like they are not. Really understood by other people
and that can also be a source of great
existential frustration.
Absolutely, absolutely. I mean, if you think about what
we're always trying to do in, in any moment,
even with ourselves, let alone others, let alone a
plurality of others. Um, LIKE right now in this
conversation, there are electric firings of neurons taking place
in the, the sort of pace, the meaty paste
of our brains, going at obscene speeds and obscene
measures that, uh, we wouldn't even be able to
comprehend the, the numerical values of. And those are
all outputting into various components in sections of our
brain that can turn those Those firings and brain
activity into language and concepts, which in real time,
in moments, fractions of seconds, we're trying to translate
into words so that you or I can understand
the other in ways that make sense. And so
the fact that we can do that at all,
I mean, it's, it's beyond wondrous, but trying to,
when you start inspecting it, and you start to
feel First of all, I, I, I think it's
an important aside. I think maybe the origins of
a lot of people's sense of being alone or
misunderstood or feeling alienated from the world and other
people, is maybe not acknowledging just how insane and
absurd what we're trying to do as far as
connection and understanding goes. I mean, that that's, I'm
not saying understanding it is always going to make
you feel better about it, but for me, like,
if there's a moment where I can experience a,
a great conversation. There's a moment where I can
experience love with a partner or understanding with a
family member. Uh, THE fact that we could map
all of the neurological activity in one brain onto
another sufficiently enough for that brain to map it
back onto the former and understand each other, it's,
it's really miraculous. And so, we are really up
against an extraordinarily miraculous and, and unlikely system of,
of understanding, and language really doesn't It, it's a
proxy. It's, it's a two-dimensional map onto the multi-dimensional
experience of what it means to, to be a
person and to exist in this world. And so,
we're always going to come up short in our
understanding of others and others' understanding of us, but
you, you know, you do your best to follow
the map through, you know, that, you know, people
give you, and you follow it through its destiny,
you know, it's routes and arrive at its destination
as best you can. Um. But you're absolutely right.
I mean, it's, it's really absurd. And there's one
thing that I think it's, you know, kind of
an interesting side dish of all of that is,
you know, there's so, you know, so many of
our experiences that are beyond language and beyond something
that is purely accessible in concrete terms or anything
otherwise, are going to live and die with us,
you know, each person. Experiences countless types of abstract
feelings and thoughts that are non-transcribable, that will never
find their way into the world of others, and
people will never fully understand that. So, that's existentially
unsettling on some on some level, but also, it's
kind of beautiful because each of us possess things
that are unique to us that nobody else in
the universe in perpetuity, as far as we're aware,
will ever Know or be able to to fully
grasp. And so, yeah, we, we live and die
with things that nobody else will ever, you know,
understand. And it's, there's a loneliness aspect to it,
but it's also quite wondrous. Um, Yeah, but I
think there's There's something to be said about how
we can also utilize that. Of course, art. And
perhaps other disciplines, but art would certainly be the
one that I would lean on the most here,
is a very interesting. Expression of the yearning to
be understood in the realms of experience in the
mind that are otherwise impossible to understand. So, it's,
you know, a, a piece of music or or
a painting or anything of that sort that tries
to Abstractly express certain, you know, patterns or experiences.
Is is a really interesting. PHENOMENON of human experience
where we know we won't be understood, but we
still strive to express that lack of understanding in
a way that maybe other people will, will recognize
themselves in and will nonetheless maybe be, you know,
feel a mirror of themselves in, in the particular
art piece. And so, art is at the same
time, a representation of the inherent loneliness of human
beings. Of human beings while also being an expression
of the inherent desire to nonetheless try to connect
with other human beings. And so, you know, I'm,
I know Schopenhauer and Nietzsche, there's so many philosophers
always end up saying, um, you know, art or
music or both, or, or, you know, one of
the ways that you can kind of supersede the
suffering of existence and, um. I don't fully subscribe
to that, but I think there's absolutely something there
to be, you know, to put your flag in,
you know, art and the creative, the creative act
and the creative expression is something that is something
along the lines of a sort of vaccine or
or antidote to suffering and self-awareness.
Do you think that that it is possible at
all for humans to live without any delusions at
all, like, for example, delusions related to a delusion,
I mean delusions of meaning, delusions of continuity, for
example, attributing any kind of meaning to whatever we're
doing in our lives, any kind of meaning to
our jobs, any kind of meaning to our relationships,
or I, I mean, if not. Day to day
meaning and ultimate meaning and delusions of continuity in
the sense that, oh, OK, so we'll reproduce, I
will have children, they will perpetuate my name into
the future and all of that. Do you think
that, I mean, first of all, do you think
or do you agree that all of those things
are at least to some extent delusional, and if
so, do you think that it's possible for us
to do away with them?
Uh, THE first answer would be yes. I do
think at least most of what you listed there
would be some amount, if not large amounts, or
totally, uh, delusional, uh, in respect to sort of
what we, you know, we, we are inspired to
feel a certain way and to do a certain
thing, and to express a certain pattern of existence
and evolution. Um, WITHOUT regard for what the actual,
maybe logic or experience of all of those things
might be. So, there's, there's a disconnect there that
results in a sort of delusion. And then, do
I think we can do away with, with them?
No, probably not, because I think that, um, being
delusional and Experiencing the illusory nature of things is
inherent to the dichotomy of our self-awareness in relation
to biological systems. So, our self-awareness is not top-down,
it's bottom up. We really arrived with self-awareness as
a product of an evolutionary and biological process that
is concerned. With a few select things, the perpetuation
and survival of itself and the and reproduction of
what, what works. And so, our self-awareness emerged out
of that. Our self-awareness did not create that. So,
it's bottom up, and so, we really, the idea
of separating from the illusions of all the things
that we've arrived with as a as a product
of our consciousness and. Self-awareness, uh, seems largely incoherent
to me and, and likely impossible because even though
we feel like we have logic, we feel like
we have concepts and terms, the idea that we
can sort of dig, we can stick our hand
back down the entire system and rewire everything in
which our logic and, and perception in terms emerge
from seems, um, Sort of like a non sequitur
to me. I think we're probably going to, uh,
be stricken too and driven by most of our
delusions. Um, BUT what we can still do, nonetheless,
is recognize certain aspects of them as being interestingly
delusional or illusory. We can explore. SORT of the
the fringes of those concepts and those realizations, and
the, the, the sort of more practical functional outcome
of that is softening the edges of what we've
inherited. And so, that's one thing that I always
try to do with my work and my thought
process is, how can I Soften the edges of
the implications of the sort of illusions and delusions
that I inhabit and exist through, so that I'm
not always being sort of poked by the corners.
Um, IT'S, it's much better when it's a rounded
edge, and you know it's an illusion, but it's
still, you can inhabit it, but it doesn't pierce
through you and totally paralyze or, or incapacitate you,
um, when there's an outcome that, you know, may,
may or may not be preferential.
Have you, it's interesting, have you ever read Stuart
Weiser's book The Users of Delusion? Why it's not
always rational to be rational?
No, I've heard of the title, but I have
not read that book. Uh,
YEAH, uh, by, by the way, for you and
for the audience, if you're interested, I also have
an interview with him about that book on the
show. So, uh, but it's interesting because the entire
book, he spends the entire book talking about how
actually sometimes for People to for things to work
out in people's lives, they have to start off
from an irrational standpoint. So one example would be
if you're in a romantic relationship and you profess
your undying love to the other person. I mean,
statistically speaking, it's irrational that you will be together
forever, right, but, but if you do that, actually
it it, what happens er what happens statistically is
that you will, it will be more likely for
that to happen because actually when you get into
that. That relationship with that framework in mind, you're
more committed and you and you instill more commitment
into your relationship and actually if you just take
a second to think about it, if you get
into a relationship and instead of saying something like
that, you say, oh yeah, today we are together,
but maybe. Tomorrow we won't be anymore. I mean,
there's really not, um, a lot, lots of reasons
there to commit yourself to that, right? So you
start from what we could call a delusion, uh,
and, uh, the rest, you could even call a
self-fulfilling prophecy, but it ends up working.
I love that analogy. I don't know if I've
heard that analogy before, but there's something that's so
simple and obvious, and it, yeah, I mean, when
you bring up the idea of sort of love,
a love between a couple sustaining throughout the entirety
of the rest of their lives, whether it's through
marriage or even without marriage, statistically, it's you you're
up against, uh, lesser odds. However, Nobody that's ever
found a partnership, a romantic partnership, um, a life
partnership in which love is a part of it,
has ever done that, I would think, without expressing
love, uh, as a fundamental tenet initially. So, you
have to commit to the absurdity as a starting
point, in spite of the sort of rationality or
the, you know, the odds of it, because your
odds. Or, or maybe not entirely zero, but nearing
zero. If you're in a romantic relationship, and you
refuse to ever tell that person that you love
them and you want to love them forever, or
that you will love them forever. Even if you
know in the back of your head. I know
what the statistics are, and nobody ever says they
they love or love somebody or want to love
somebody forever, ever, and will love somebody forever. And,
and then Never meant it, and turns out they
get divorced. Like, people don't get married knowing that
they're going to get divorced, and so, everybody is
really up against the same protocol of, I'm assuming
this marriage or this relationship is going to work
long term, and yet the the the odds and
statistics tell us that at least uh, you know,
50% or more don't. I don't know what the
exact numbers are. So, the irony is, in order
to be in the minority of successes, you have
to commit to the, the, the fact that there's
a certain absurdity in committing at all to anything.
In this case, uh, a loving relationship, but, um,
I would argue it's worth it because you only
find out which bucket you're in by by committing
to the to the one that is, you know,
assuming it's, it's gonna work out and things are
gonna work out. And, um, yeah, I mean, it
always kind of boils down to, I guess it's
a very cliche thing. You could just say, is
it better to, you know, have loved or lost
or to never have loved at all. You could
apply that to so many things. Is it better
to care? At all. Um, IS it, you know,
care and lose than to never have cared at
all? Is it better to strive towards success or
meaning, uh, and fail than it is to have
never strived or, or, or cared about meaning at
all? There's so many different things you could blanket
that over. But yeah, it's, it's a very interesting
analogy that you have to start from a point
of essentially what would be, uh, clearly defined as
irrationality to arrive at something that ultimately might be
the preferable and maybe even more rational outcome. Um,
SO, you have to really, the tightrope walk, the
balancing act of, of irrationality, feeling, sentimentality, logic. It's
really absurd and it's really difficult, and, and that
makes it even more like when you try to
do calculuses about these sorts of decision making processes
in life, the obscurity of the balance of all
of those sorts of things makes it Even more
challenging to make sense of and can make it
even more overwhelming. And, um, I think the best
you could do is try to follow your, your
own authentic line of reasoning, whether it's reasonable or
not by by common standards, or by logic and
your own intuition, and then, um, Accept the fact
that no matter what you do, you're always gonna
kind of end up in a position where life
is challenging and devoid of certain aspects of resolution
and meaning and all that, and you, you, you
can just embrace your circumstance in life as long
as you're authentic to your own line of reasoning
and decision making in every opportunity that you can.
Do you think that there's wisdom to be found
in a more Buddhist approach to life where you
try the best you can to perhaps eliminate er
as much desire as possible and to detach yourself
from the things and from other people?
Yeah, there's absolutely wisdom in it, and I absolutely
think this, this kind of mirrors, I think, your
question about, uh, neon Genesis, where I would say
that if you could be born into the world
that you described, or the system that you described,
uh, in Neon Genesis, that would be preferable. However,
If you're not, and you're deciding about that from
the perspective of a of a person who's lived
through many years and formed their sense of self
and orientation through the world outside of that world,
um, the neon Genesis world, then it would be
really that transition is, is, is not gonna work.
And so, in the same sense, I would say,
when it comes to, uh, the sort of Buddhist,
uh, you know, s like the elimination of desire
and aesthetic approach to life, I, I think there's
There's something that is wise there that I think
would probably Alleviate some of the tension of selfhood
and self-awareness, but only insofar as that's your, that's
your normative experience starting from a fairly early age
and your understanding of the world. I, I won't
speak for you, but for me, for, from my
perspective, trying to recontort my entirety of my life
and my life experiences into an ascetic Buddhist, you
know, devoid of, of selfhood, devoid of uh desire
and attachment to things. That is going to be
something that's gonna cause more problems for me than
than resolve, I would think. Now, I haven't tried
full on. Uh, I try in in sort of
various subtle ways. Um, I try to live in
a, in a way that is, um, Respectful of
desire and interest and selfhood, but not um attached
to it in in in in insofar as I
am capable of doing that, and so far as
I'm capable of detaching from the constant need to
placate a certain continuous need to make sense of
things, or to have things, or to prove things,
and all of that, um, But if I could,
the idea of bringing that all the way to
its, you know, sort of Buddhist aesthetic conclusion, uh,
seems highly unlikely to me and seems highly problematic.
And so, yeah, it's, it's, it's really, is there
wisdom in it? Yes. Is there wisdom that's applicable
to a large majority of the modern world's, you
know, human experience? Hard to, hard to say, but
I would, I, I would think it would be
almost an impossibility to sort of adhere to that
wisdom.
Yeah, but I think that at least when it
comes to the most extreme side of things with
things like, for example, consumerism, that people could get
some very important wisdom from Buddhism because I mean,
I'm not saying. Yeah, just try to eat and
drink as little as possible. Try to extricate yourself
from worldly pleasures and even your biological needs and
stuff like that. But when it comes to the
more extreme side of things, actually, I think that
I mean, I'm not necessarily saying everyone, I'm not
sure about everyone, but many people perhaps would be,
would have more peace of mind and would find
themselves happier if they just let go of wanting
more and more and more and more things to
accumulate things to, and if they get really unhappy
and angry and so on just because, oh, I
don't have enough money to go on that vacation
or I don't have enough money to buy that
luxury car and so on and so forth. I
guess that if people just, of course I understand
perfectly well that in the sort of capitalist system
that we do there's we're all constantly bombarded by
advertising and you have to. THIS you have to
buy that and to, to be someone you have
to own this or that. But at the same
time, I think that if people put a little
bit more effort into trying to overcome those desire,
those artificial desires that at a certain point sort
of become needs in their minds, that could be
very liberating.
I agree completely. So, to be clear, I think
there is a a spectrum, and I was referring
my previous answer was more a binary answer in
terms of whether or not the, the sort of
average modern westernized person could benefit or would benefit
from, uh, a pure, a purist Buddhist ascetic kind
of lifestyle. Now, that is slightly different than what
I am understanding what you just described, wherein you're
utilizing Ideas and frameworks of something like Buddhism or
something like Buddhism to soften the edges of your
tendencies that you've absorbed through the contingencies of your
culture and place in the world and time and
history, which I would absolutely agree with. And so,
that's, that's like I mentioned, a, a, a few
moments ago, the softening of the edges of whether
it's delusions and their consequences, or Your tendencies and
preferences and desires, uh, sort of all across the
board here. I would say when you can find
philosophical tools to shave off edges, it's highly advisable
and highly useful in a, in a kind of
wisdom. And in the case of Buddhism, In the
way that you're referring to it as, I would,
I would agree that when you can recognize the,
the ceiling of your, the quality of experience, and
how many of your desires are serving you or
not, and restricting your continual pursuance and, and sort
of haywiring towards those desires, um, if you can
mitigate that. Soften that, bring it down, find the
ceiling, the relative ceiling for you personally, and, and
let it hit that, and then not bounce against
it, and, and just constantly be vibrating against your
being. There's absolutely value in that. There's absolutely wisdom.
And that's the realm that I try to inhabit,
and that's the, that's the realm I try to
articulate and express with my work, particularly is, you
know, let's recognize the extreme. OF, you know, uh
the, the, the downsides of desire in certain forms.
Recognize the inevitability of our desire in certain forms
and figure out what the equilibrium is. Where is
it? Where can we kind of start to recognize
it's, it's being problematic, being, um, deficient toward our
quality of experience, and try to rein it in
as best we can. And, and there it's particularly
easy, and one thing that despite all the things
happening in the world and with new generations that
may be, you know, may or may not be
questionable or or concerning, there does seem to be
a tendency, at least maybe this is from my
unique perspective. I'm not sure if this is true
for everybody, from, but from my perspective, there does
seem to be a tendency in which people are
starting to recognize the futility and the insufficiency of
consumerism and The way in which the sort of
material satisfaction and placation of our desires doesn't result
into anything meaningful, and so, I don't know culturally
or collectively if that'll that'll take form in a
meaningful way, but I individually, I would say it's
absolutely the case that the further you can get
from your desires overtaking you and being Sort of
absorbed or consumed by the particular. You know, culture
that you're a part of, the society that you're
part of, which is functioning off of your, you
know, you're there a, a culture, an economy is
basically functioning off its ability to convince enough people
to buy enough stuff and subsist off enough desire.
Um, THAT'S how capitalistic societies work. And so, Recognizing
where your limit is and where, you know, your
lifestyle is more than satiated, your preference and quality
of experience is more than satiated. Uh, IT'S incredibly
wise, and even on a practical level, it allows
you to sort of engage or disengage with the
society or culture you're a part of, and the
economy and your career that you're a part of
in a way that is, uh, materially different from
maybe the norm in which it's just like, you're
supposed to do this this amount of time and
make This amount of money, but you can actually
recognize what your preferences are, what your quality of
experience is derived from, and you can make different
decisions based off that understanding by actually inspecting where
your limit of desire sort of expires, and where
your quality of experience maximizes, and then make all
sorts of different evaluations and decisions based on that.
Do you think that people should aim at being
good people, and if so, what do you think
it means to be a good person?
Hm. Well, of course, I believe people should aim
to be a good person. Um, GOOD is an
interesting term to use there because it's so nebulous,
um, but Kindness is often a word that I
think is best suited as their proper proxy for
what I like to um think about and consider
in this kind of question and these kinds of
contexts. But, um, There's something interesting about I'm not
sure if you're familiar with with game theory. I'm
not, I'm, I'm by no means an expert, but
my understanding of game theory is, it has, has,
uh, enlightened me in a number of ways as
it pertains to this sort of question where, uh,
it's actually, it's strategically sensible to be not a
pushover, but, but, uh, trustworthy and forgiving. And so,
Just on the level, if you just boil it
down to the level of, well, what's in it
for me, or what's functional, it's actually the most
functional to be kind and and trustworthy initially, and
then forgiving post hoc, um, as long as, so
long as you're not just, you know, willing to
be taken advantage all the time. So, it's, it's
functional to be a good person in the world.
That's, it seems to be, uh, uh. An equation
of reality that's built into the mechanisms through which
we, you know, inhabit and, and participate. And so,
just on that level of practicality and functionality, it's
important to be a good person because that seems
to be, it's been proven through a number of
different studies and really Interesting research that being a
good person, a kind person, a forgiving person, somebody
that doesn't try to screw people over just because
you can, is actually the most functional way in
which, um, systems work in which evolution and species
function and, and, and thrive. So, just on that
level alone. And then beyond that, there, you know,
I don't know. People, people live and die sociopathically
and psychopathically or something adjacent to it where they
don't feel the emotions or consequences of having been
a bad person, but individually, Uh, you know, I
have to live with myself every day, whether it's
an illusion or not, selfhood, uh, I still have
to live with myself. I have to know what
I've done and know what I want to do.
And do I want to inhabit a being in
a life, an illusion of self in which I'm
feeling like I'm being a worse person, uh, than,
than the norm, than then what's good and functional,
than what's been established as good and kind. That
seems to me to be, um, a terrible existence.
Um. So, it's important to be good in the
way that I'm assuming you mean it, both from
a functional, practical perspective for the purposes of your
own self-interest, and from the purposes of, you know,
what, what philosophically, what kind of person do you
want to, uh, you know, inhabit? What kind of
being do you want to inhabit? And if there's
anything worth the suffering of our consciousness and our
self-awareness, I think it's a reflective, it's partly the
reflective ability to recognize the inherent flaws in the
gruesomeness of what it means to exist and be
alive. We are, when we watch, when we observe
nature, and we see something that's so gruesome between
animals. We think Well, that's I mean, it's, it's
the way of nature, but we, we, uh, you
know, wanna turn away. Maybe some people wanna watch
it, but you wanna psychologically you recognize that there
is something. Obscene and horrible about it, and you're
deterred from participating. And so there's something interesting about
the conceptual framework we have about life and existence
by virtue of our consciousness that Allows us to
be self-reflective about whether or not being gruesome and,
and, and, you know, violent is, is the right
way of, of being and existing, and it seems
to be the answer is no. And so, for
whatever reason, like I mentioned, there's a couple different
reasons from just an interpersonal, from a functional, and
a practical. There are so many good reasons to
be self-reflective about what it means to be a
good person, what it means to be moral. And
to strive continually toward the sort of North Star
or whatever that might be, even if it's a
subjective orientation, even if that's a matter of purely,
you know, human perspective or or sentient life perspective,
it is nonetheless something that is worthwhile and beautiful
to to pursue and and follow through, and we've
done so much over the history of humanity. I
mean, when you consider the Sort of tranches of
human history and the gruesomeness and violence that we
seem to have been, I mean, we're still a
ways away, but we seem to have, uh, reduced
significantly and changed significantly and evolved significantly through our,
you know, what, what moral standards are, should be
norms and what levels of violence should be or
shouldn't be norms. I mean, these are incredible progressions
that we've done over relatively short spans of time
relative to, you know, the history of life.
Yeah, and I mean, there are several things that
could fall under the rubric of what we call
being a good person. I mean, apart from the,
I think something that is very obvious like being
a compassionate person just because we are all in
the same kind of predicament as humans. I mean,
just recently I released my 5th interview with David
Bennettar where we talked about his book, The Human
Predicament. That it's a very interesting book, for example,
and, but I mean just because we are in
the same predicament, being compassionate in principle is a
proper attitude to have. But also, I mean, there
are many examples I could talk about here, but
there are two particular examples that I think if
you apply in your life, it's good for you
and good for other people as well. Like for
example, Approaching new relationships, assuming goodness in the other
person. I mean, of course you don't need to
be naive nor anything like that. Actually, you shouldn't
be naive, naive, because if the other person shows
clear signs that she shouldn't be trusted or something
like that, of course you should treat her accordingly,
but at least from a starting. Point, you should
assume that she is a good person, otherwise you
would be condemning them just from a a a
a a priori. You would be condemning them and
you would probably be missing out on good relationships
just because, for example, you've been betrayed before and
now you always walk into new relationships with this
mindset that there's always the risk of that. Happening
again and of course there there always is, but
that's why I say that you shouldn't be naive,
but you also shouldn't start from a standpoint where
you assume that you are going to be mistreated
by the other person. Otherwise, I mean, either you're
going to ruin the relationship or you yourself, and
that's also a form of ruining the relationship, but
you're going to mistreat. Other person just because you
assume that's going to happen. And another thing then
there, there's a very also very interesting recent book,
The Science of Revenge. I can't recall the name
of the author off the top of my head
now, but, uh, where it talks about the importance
of forgiveness and actually forgiveness is, uh, good, very
good. Also for the person herself, because if you
are unable to forgive someone who wronged you, then
you will take that baggage with you for the
rest of your life, and it's going to actually
poison your mind, your psyche. I mean, you just
at a certain point have to be able to
let things go because it can. Just ruin yourself.
So what do you think about that? I, I
mean that I, I mentioned that because I think
that those are the two diff two different ways,
particularly for people who have been damaged by other
people, uh, that if they apply them to their
own lives, it can be good for them, even
if they don't care that much about being good
for other people.
You're right, fair point. Yeah, I mean. Just for,
again, there's a couple different layers. There's the practical
level, and then there's sort of this, I don't
know what the best way of framing it in
terms of, you know, particular umbrella term would be,
but there's practical, and then there's just the it's
sort of ethereality of wanting to be good in
whatever context you might exist. Um, AND so, when
it comes to both the cases that you brought
up, They're very interesting because they're very, they're difficult,
and they're difficult in the way that you uh
referred to earlier when it's, you have to commit
to somebody. You have to commit to love and
commit to somebody for there to even be the
possibility of a loving relationship forming out of it,
even in spite of the odds being slightly out
of your favor that a long-term loving relationship is
actually gonna work long term. And so, in the
same way when it comes to like trusting somebody.
There's something to be said about how untrustworthy people
can be over a long enough span of time.
And yet, if you assume that The people that
you're trying to form friendships, relationships, or partnerships with
are untrustworthy, then you're going to potentially be the
person that is acting untrustworthy, and you're going to
create the very problem that you're hoping to avoid,
which is a lack of closeness and proximity and
trustworthiness between multiple parties. And so, you have to
kind of lead with a kind of goodness. Despite
the rationality of that goodness, knowing that there is
nonetheless a kind of practicality to that that function
system. And same goes with um the, the, the
second. Uh, uh, LAYER that you brought up, which
was forgiveness, it's slightly different because that's post hoc,
you know, that's after the fact.
But yeah, I, I was basically giving, uh, the
both ends of a relationship, the, the start of
a relationship and the end of a, yeah,
yeah, and it's very interesting because, because that's the
right binary is like you gotta trust somebody to
begin with for it to possibly work. And still,
whether you do or don't, you could end up
in a situation where you could be done seriously
wrong in whatever capacity, whatever kind of relationship it
might be, or or just life in general, where
you encounter random people throughout your life and things,
things happen, and you have to decide if the
things that happen when they're when they're terrible for
you are worthy of, uh, uh, forgiving. Uh, TOWARDS,
towards the individuals through which they, they arrived and
were caused and um. I, I am somebody who
Genuinely tries to to be as forgiving as possible.
And that doesn't mean I don't experience moments where
if somebody has done something wrong to me that's
affected me negatively, and I could tell it was
sort of a, it wasn't an accident. It was,
it was on purpose. It was thought out, doesn't
mean that doesn't infuriate me. Doesn't mean it doesn't
make me want. Uh, TO sort of incite revenge,
but I recognize and I try, this is a
case where this sort of philosophical tool of softening
the edges can be very useful, where I try
to soften the edges of that natural reaction of
venge. NESS and and trying to reciprocate when it's
no longer, the reciprocation is not going to prove,
like, it's not going to help the relationship further.
It's not going to communicate to the person or
group that this, the thing you did is not
OK. We have to recalibrate our understanding of what's
OK. It's not, if it's not that situation anymore,
it's just like, it's, there's no, there's nothing to
be had amongst us anymore. Vengefulness and reciprocation, it's
just essentially just scratching your own itch, and, um,
I get it. I get the impulse. I get
the desire to do that, but I, I try
to Um, recognize the lack of usefulness, and more
than that, the actual counterproductivity it often seems to,
to result in. Now, granted, I haven't had, there
are people who have had, you know, such tragic,
terrible things occur in their lives as a result
of other humans that I have not had or
experienced. So, I have not experienced this sort of
vengefulness tick. To the degree in which one certainly
could. And I can't imagine what that might be
like, and I don't want to speak as if
I know how I would respond to that kind
of experience. Like, if a, you know, a, a,
a mother, father, son, daughter, girlfriend, wife, whatever got,
um, killed or hurt, uh, by somebody. I don't
know, you know, my reaction to that would, would
probably be very different than all the things that
I've experienced that were wrongdoings from other people up
until this point in my life. But nonetheless, objectively
speaking and philosophically speaking, Um, the tendency towards reciprocation,
I think, is philosophically incoherent at that point. Um,
I tend to be somebody who sees The contingencies
of being as um Producing the outcomes of kinds
of behavior that people are largely victims of, as
opposed to um perpetrators of. I see, I see
just about everybody and every being in existence as
a victim of existence universally, uh, including whatever things
they've found them, whatever problematic situations or behaviors they've
found themselves in or carrying out, makes them to
a victim to the sort of substrate of existence
that they found themselves in, and I try to
remind myself that whenever I can, when I'm dealing
with people or things that are, are upsetting or
frustrating.
Yeah, and of course if we're talking about self-awareness
and we're talking about existential questions here, we can't
avoid talking about death, right, and our fear of
death and of course, I mean as biological entities
and with the degree of sentience and consciousness and
the degree of uh and the cognitive abilities that
we have as humans, the degree of understanding of
our own. Predicament that we have, uh, I mean,
it would be silly to not to think that
it's not normal for people to be afraid of
death, but that's one aspect of it. But if
we try to detach ourselves as best as possible
from our sort of biological evolved instincts, do you
think that ultimately we should be afraid of that?
Oh, that's a good framing of that question, cause
I, I know we are, whether or not we
should be. I, I personally strive to be as
unafraid of death as possible, and so that's going
to be fighting against the very nature of what
it means to be a living thing, because, um,
for the most part, obviously there are some beings,
some living things, some humans who are born with
maybe a different relationship with what, you know, sort
of survival instincts there are discrepancies and Um, deviancies
across that spectrum, but for the most part, we
are all born with the desire to survive. They
sort of inbuilt yearning to survive and avoid death
and reproduce. And so, the hardest one I find
is not whether or not you want to reproduce,
though that's very, very hard. The harder one is
whether or not you're, you can find comfort in,
um, in death, and whether or not you can
Sort of divorce yourself from the fear of death,
and that's something that I think that sits at
the crux at the foundation of a lot of
philosophy, art, poetry. I think we're all trying to
In various ways, justify existence in the face of
death or really reduce the intensity, um, of the
implications of death. Um, I'm not sure if it's,
that's something we'll ever be able to do easily
as a species, but as individuals, I think gaining
a certain degree of comfort. With death based on
maybe an understanding of what death provides and why
it's necessary, which could be a rationalization, and I'm
well, well aware, well, well aware of that. Um,
BUT utilizing sort of thought processes that help you
detach from, you know, pure attachment to your being
in your existence, and also recognize that through your
mortality and The temporality of your time, the time
that you have, and everything that you could and
can't experience. If you recognize it's up against the
backstop of death, then It, it inspires a kind
of meaning that may not, that perhaps wouldn't exist
if we didn't have a finality, if we didn't
have a point at which everything dissolved away and
disappeared, or at least the potential thereof. I do
question whether or not the kinds of meaning we
derive from life would have the depth and poignancy
and wonder and intensity that we currently experience by
virtue of our awareness of our mortality.
Yeah, I mean, I'm going to talk about my
own approach to death and why at this point
in life I am as close as not being
afraid at all of death as I personally can.
I mean, I'm not sure if, but there's probably
other people out there that are even closer to
not being afraid of death at all than I
am, but There are, I mean, there's a philosophical
aspect to it, and there's also three different experiences
in my life that basically molded that in a
sense. So the philosophical end of things was when
I read Plato's Apology of Socrates, I mean when
he's condemned to death and he has to drink
the hemlock, but then he's reunited with basically his
disciples and they're all sad because he's going to
die and so on. He tells them, oh, you
know, you don't need to be sad because death
can be one of two things. Either there's life
after death, and I'm going to meet with some
of the people from history that I admire the
most, and so that would be, that will be
great. Or it can be just a sleepless, just
a dreamless sleep, and I mean, and he says,
and have you ever experienced anything better in life
than Uh, dreamless sleep. So I, I, I mean,
I mean, and, and when I read that, I
was like, yeah, I mean, that's, this sounds very
comforting actually. There are many philosophers out there that
think that that is one of his weakest arguments
in the apology, but I, I quite like it.
But then, I mean, in terms of my experiences,
33 things that happened. So there was this one
time, it was just this one time, it never
happened again, but there was this one night where
I had a completely dreamless sleep, and I know
this for sure because I don't quite remember the
content of my dreams, but I always remember that
I had a dream, and that night I didn't
dream at all, and I woke up in. The
exact same position I lied down the, the previous
night, so I had, I experienced no dreaming at
all, and it was fantastic. And then, and, and
then I mean, when I was 18 years old,
I, I had to undergo a surgery because I
had a cyst on my back and so on,
and I was put under. General anesthesia and then
they asked me to count down from 10 and
uh I just blacked out completely and there was
nothing at all to be experienced at that time
I was under anesthesia. And I mean, I don't
have any complaints about it. And then even, even
when it comes to the process of Dying itself.
I mean, I have a, I mean, it's, it
was close to a near death experience when I
was 9. Um, I was having a swimming. I
was at a swimming lesson and I had an
accident. I fell into the swimming pool and I
was there drowning, and I'm not sure exactly the
degree of consciousness I still had, but I knew
I was there. I was still there in some
way, but I was drowning. And I was completely
at peace. I mean, I, I wasn't struggling anything,
so, I mean, nowadays with all of that, uh,
it's just Very hard for me to be afraid
of death, but again, maybe that's the, on the
one hand, it's the way I interpreted Socrates' words,
and on the other hand, it's just my own
personal experiences and also how I dealt with them.
So I don't know what you think about that.
No, I think that's beautiful. I mean, there is
the fact that So Kind of digging a little
bit deeper, uh, from my last answer, you know,
part of what we started this conversation on is
around how the individuation process, the awareness of a
self, the conceptual attachment to that self, and all
of the aspects that, you know, all of the
things in the sort of chaotic relationship we experience
with reality as a result of that. IS a
virt by virtue of being a living, being conscious
entity that is feels separate from everything. And so,
um, whether it's a dreamless sleep or a surgery
or death, it is the ultimate alleviation of that,
uh, individuation, uh, oriented suffering that we might experience.
So, I, I tend to be reluctant to maybe
share this side of, of the coin just because
I don't, you know, I don't know, it's, it's
can be heavy, but yeah, there's the, the another
way you could think about death is being sort
of a, a Tron, Emile Tron-esque interpretation where it's
sort of the final alleviation of every, every aspect
of the bullshit and chaos that you've been forced
into experiencing as being born into a human. And
so death is something that you're biologically wired to
resist, and when you're in your waking state, you,
you know, you're awake and you don't, you know,
you're not sleepy yet, but once you fall asleep
and, and, and you dip into that realm, it's,
it's, it's maybe not so bad. Maybe it's, it's,
it's a deeply alleviating, um, process of, of the
whole
So one last topic because I'm also saying that
we're running out of time, but, yeah, and also
since you mentioned before we started recording that you
quite liked my interviews with David Benatar, uh, what
do you, what is your position on anti-Nalism? I
mean, do you think, uh, taking into account all
of the existential dread. We explored here today and
uh things related to self-awareness, consciousness, and all of
that. Do you think that it would just be
better for us to try to stop procreating and
uh consciously and intentionally putting, uh, gradually, of course,
putting an end to self-awareness, at least on the
human level.
Yeah, so, for starters, I see the antenatalist, specifically
Benatar's argument, his asymmetry argument, uh, very logically convincing.
I, I, I understand the through line of logic
there, and it makes a lot of sense. Um.
I don't want to pick a position here, but
I will say that, um, given the cadence of
a lot of the questions and topics we talked
about, there's something about the maybe clash or incoherence
between logic and lived experience that might be applicable
to such an argument, where the logic of Continuing
the human experience, the logic of continuing self-aware experience
seems to be Poor a lot. Like, that's, that's
on the, the, the, the side of the argument
that is maybe deficient, at least based on Benatar's
asymmetry argument, which I would, I would say is,
is sound. However, There's something about committing first in
spite of the probability or the logic of a
situation that can somehow equate to a a more
functional, um, overarching experience or system of existence. And
so, Uh, it's a, it's a bit of a
convoluted answer, but I, I think that despite the
logic of something like antenatalism, there is, there is
something interesting to be said in the face of
it, against it, that nonetheless provides, um, a lot
of intrigue to me. Um, YOU gotta commit to
loving and trusting somebody, including maybe a phenomenon like
existence and self-awareness first. In order to derive a
a functional relationship with it over the long haul.
Mhm. Great. So, look, uh, it's been great to
talk with you and just to, just to tell
people that the book is again the terrible paradox
of self-awareness, how awareness is the beginning and end
of suffering. I will be leaving a link to
it in the description. And by the way, apart
from your YouTube channel, which I will be leaving
a link to Wendy if you agree, I will
send you a link to Wendy as a collaborator
there as well. Um, WHERE can people find you
on the internet?
Yeah, Pursuit of Wonder on on all socials, and
YouTube is, is primarily where I make most of
my work. Um, AND then also, I write books.
So, if you search Robert Pantano, whether that's on
Google, Amazon, Barnes and Noble, or wherever you get
books, you can find, uh, you can find my
books there as well.
Great. So, thanks so much for the great talk.
It's been great to everyone and it's been really
fun and uh and informative to talk with you.
Likewise, I really appreciate you having me, Ricardo.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pancortezus Suliliski,
Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and Wiseman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai,
Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Dio
Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr. Old
Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gelbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler, Alexander
Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Janus
Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to
my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink, Tom
Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick Cortiz,
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.